## Adaptive Fault Tolerance Strategies for Large Scale Systems

This repo contains the code, publications and thesis from my research work between 2010 to 2012 on **Adaptive Fault Tolerance Strategies for Large Scale Systems (Supercomputers)** as part of the Masters program at **Indian Institute of Science**. 

Below is the abstract of this work, taken from my thesis.

### Abstract

Exascale systems of the future are predicted to have mean time between node failures (MTBF) of less than one hour. At such low MTBF, the number of processors available for execution ofa long running application can widely vary throughout the execution of the application. Employing traditional fault tolerance strategies like periodic checkpointing in these highly dynamicenvironments may not be effective because of the high number of application failures, result-ing in large amount of work lost due to rollbacks apart from the increased recovery overheads.In this context, it is highly necessary to have fault tolerance strategies that can adapt to thechanging node availability and also help avoid significant number of application failures. Inthis thesis, we present two adaptive fault tolerance strategies that make use of node failure pre-diction mechanisms to provide proactive fault tolerance for long running parallel applicationson large scale systems.

The first part of the thesis deals with an adaptive fault tolerance strategy for malleable appli-cations. We present AdFT, an adaptive fault tolerance framework for long running malleableapplications to maximize application performance in the presence of failures. We first developcost models that consider different factors like accuracy of node failure predictions and application scalability, for evaluating the benefits of various fault tolerance actions including checkpointing, live-migration and rescheduling. Our adaptive framework then uses the cost models tomake runtime decisions for dynamically selecting the fault tolerance actions at different pointsof application execution to minimize application failures and maximize performance. Simulations with real and synthetic failure traces show that our approach outperforms existing fault tolerance mechanisms for malleable applications yielding up to 23% improvement in work doneby the application in the presence of failures, and is effective even for petascale and exascale systems. **FT-Sim, a fault tolerance simulator for large scale systems** was developed for these simulation based studies fer exascale systems.

In the second part of the thesis, we present a fault tolerance strategy using adaptive process replication that can provide fault tolerance for applications using partial replication of a set of application processes. This fault tolerance framework adaptively changes the set of replicated processes (replicated set) periodically based on node failure predictions to avoid application failures. We have developed an **MPI prototype implementation, PaReP-MPI** that allows dynamically changing the replicated set of processes for MPI applications. Experiments with real scientific applications on real systems have shown that the overhead of PaReP-MPI is minimal. We have shown using simulations with real and synthetic failure traces that our strategy involving adaptive process replication significantly outperforms existing mechanisms providing up to 20% improvement in application efficiency even for exascale systems. Significant observations are also made which can drive future research efforts in fault tolerance for large and very large scale systems.
